damns serve a wide variety of purposes
from hydropower to flood control to
storage of water for municipal and
industrial uses but when a dams useful
purpose fades away the structure itself
still remains dams come in all shapes
and sizes but contrary to what you might
think the most dangerous stamps are
often the smallest ham Grady and this is
practical engineering on today's episode
we're talking about the dangers of
low-head dams
[Music]
this video sponsored by Squarespace
visit squarespace.com slash practical
engineering to get a free trial more on
that later and low-head dams sometimes
simply called a weir is a small
structure that impounds a small amount
of water across the width of a river or
stream usually made from concrete the
purpose of low-head dams is to raise the
water level upstream on a river this can
assist with navigation of the channel by
boats create a drop for generating
hydropower and make water available at
intakes for water supply and irrigation
thousands of these structures have been
constructed over the years to take
advantage of natural water courses and
rivers the heyday of low-head dam
construction was actually in the 1800s
when mills and factories often relied on
water power to drive grinding wheels and
other equipment this was at a time when
moving water was the most consistent
source of power available in large
quantities before the widespread
adoption of electricity
most of these old mills and factories
are long gone and the ones that still
survive certainly don't depend on water
for power anymore that means many
property owners are forced to maintain
these old structures that no longer have
any practical use or more commonly and
much worse these dams are abandoned by
their owner and gradually fall into
disrepair in the u.s. dam safety
regulations focused primarily on the
possibility of a dam breaching and
causing a flood wave downstream but
because low-head dams are relatively
short a breach poses minimal danger so
most states don't keep track of these
small structures and especially if
they've been abandoned it can be
difficult to enforce maintenance
regulations on their owners but even
though they pose a little danger in the
event of a breach low-head dams create a
public safety issue that has caused more
fatalities in the u.s. than all dam
failures in the past 20 years to
understand why we first need to know a
little bit about open channel hydraulics
if you haven't seen my video about
hydraulic jumps i'll summarize it here
go back and check out that video if you
want to learn more open channel flow
that's flow that's not confined within a
pipe has a very important property
related to its velocity
that governs its behavior slow tranquil
moving water is called sub critical
because waves propagate faster than the
flow velocity faster moving water is
super critical because the waves move
slower than the flow velocity anytime a
supercritical flow encounters
subcritical flow an interesting
phenomenon called a hydraulic jump is
formed low-head dams almost always have
subcritical flow upstream the flow is
deep slow and trangle as it makes its
way to the dam but as the flow passes
over the weir it picks up speed and
becomes supercritical when this super
critical flow transitions back to
subcritical flow in the slower moving
water downstream it creates the
hydraulic jump as you can see here in my
model it's easy to see why these types
of structures could pose a threat to
those using the waterway for recreation
any location with fast-moving water and
high turbulence can be dangerous to
swimmers or kayakers but the location of
this hydraulic jump can turn a
manageable risk into an almost surefire
way to drown the depth of the flow
downstream of a dam is called the tail
water and it controls the location of
the hydraulic jump in my model I can
adjust the elevation of the tail water
by adding or removing these stop locks
when tail water is low the hydraulic
jump forms away from the dam this is a
fully developed jump that follows the
traditional shape and flow patterns if I
send down this piece of wood as a
kayaker surrogate it experiences some
turbulence as it passes over the weir
and the jump but it doesn't have much
trouble escaping downstream but as the
tail water rises the jump moves closer
and closer to the dam eventually if the
tail water is high enough the hydraulic
jump will reach the dam this condition
is called a submerged or drown jump
it may look fairly innocuous but this is
when things get dangerous let's end our
kayaker surrogate down to see why a
submerged hydraulic jump creates an area
of recirculation immediately downstream
of the dam sometimes called a keeper for
obvious reasons the jet of the hydraulic
jump surfaces downstream causing a boil
point sometimes this is easy to see and
sometimes it's not either way object
or people will only be able to escape a
submerged hydraulic jump if they're able
to get beyond this boil point and any
rescuers who approach a submerged jump
from the downstream run the risk of
being drawn into the hydraulic
themselves the recirculating current
that traps recreative is dangerous
enough on its own but there are other
contributing factors to the dangers of
low-head dams these currents also trap
large debris between the strong
hydraulic forces and the hard concrete
surface of the dam which can batter
someone trapped in the keeper the water
is often cold increasing the potential
for hypothermia and further
disorientation the turbulence of the
hydraulic jump in trains a lot of air
reducing the buoyancy of a swimmer and
low-head dams often span the entire
width of a river meaning there's no
still water nearby that can be used as a
safe haven this is exactly why the
low-head dam is called the perfect
drowning machine all these factors added
together create a situation that's
almost impossible to survive
[Music]
there are a lot of ways to mitigate this
issue the simplest option is just to
keep people away from these structures
some states require that exclusion zones
be established to make sure that
kayakers safely portage dams instead of
trying to run them good signage and
buoys as warnings can sometimes be
enough to keep people safe another
option is to modify the structure to
reduce the potential for recirculating
currents researchers have proposed
various retrofits to existing dams to
improve flow conditions when tail waters
high of course the most obvious but also
most expensive way to address the issue
is to remove these dams altogether in
many cases that are no longer serving an
important role and removing dams can
help restore ecosystems and improve
connectivity for aquatic species in
addition to removing a hazard if you're
swimming or paddling on a river with a
low head dam don't underestimate the
danger of these powerful hydraulic
forces different conditions on the river
can dramatically change the behavior of
the hydraulic jump as we saw so be
careful if you're new to the channel you
might not know that I have a website too
it's got a blog post for each video with
extra information a little bit about me
and a small shop with some t-shirts when
I first started this channel I knew I
wanted to have a web site to serve as a
landing page but I didn't want to learn
web development or spend a bunch of time
writing code that's why I chose
Squarespace 4 years ago and have been
using it ever since I don't have to
update or patch anything the templates
look awesome and if I ever have an issue
or question they have 24/7 365 day
support available to help this may sound
silly but ever since I first logged onto
the Internet as a kid I knew I wanted to
have my own website
Squarespace made it easy and simple to
fill that dream of having my own little
corner of the web take a look at
practical dot engineering and let me
know in the comments what type of stuff
you'd like to see me post there if
you've got an idea to share with the
world Squarespace is offering fans of
the channel a free trial at
squarespace.com slash practical
engineering use access code practical
engineering to get an additional 10% off
your first purchase I
dream is just an idea that doesn't have
a website yet thank you for watching and
let me know what you think
[Music]
you